rewrite the Concepts section (#25)
firewalld/firewalld.github.io: documentation/concepts.md

---
layout: page
title: "Concepts"
--- 

## Introduction

> firewalld aims to be a simple, zoning, stateful firewall. Firewall rules
> are organized into zones and policies. Zones logically separate the
> network. Policies apply rules to traffic flowing between zones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firewalld is a simple, stateful, zoned based firewall with a number of features, including policies. Policies and zones are used to organize firewall rules. The network is logically divided into zones and the traffic flowing between them can be governed by policies.
```

Reviewer: I added a suggestion to make the introductory summary a little less terse.

Author: Good suggestion. I dropped part of the first sentence.

```
Firewalld is a simple, stateful, zoned based firewall. Policies and
zones are used to organize firewall rules. The network is logically
divided into zones and the traffic flowing between them can be governed
by policies.
```

This looks like the following:

```
+----------+     policyA     +----------+
|          |  <------------  |          |
| internal |                 | external |
|  (zone)  |                 |  (zone)  |
|          |  ------------>  |          |
+----------+     policyB     +----------+
```

In addition to logically separating the network, zones may also apply
firewall rules to traffic destined to the host running firewalld.

Policies may apply firewall rules to a variety of traffic, e.g.
forwarded traffic. This is useful for network level filtering.

> 

Author: That's correct. Attaching rules to zones is mostly historical. Ideally they'd just be containers to attach interface/sources.

Should I make it clear that zones are internally implemented via policies?

Should I de-emphasis attaching rules to zones?

> 

Author: Is this better or worse? :D

```
Policies may apply firewall rules to all traffic types. This includes
filtering input, forwarded, and output traffic; as well as performing
network address translations (NAT).

In addition to logically separating the network, zones implicitly
provide a policy for traffic destined to the host running firewalld
(input).
```

## Zone Principles

Firewalld follows some strict principles in regards to zones.

1. traffic ingresses one and only one zone
2. traffic egresses one and only one zone
3. a zone defines a level of trust
4. intra-zone (with-in the same zone) is implicitly allowed
5. inter-zone (zone to zone) must be explicit, denied by default

Principle 4 and 5 are actually a consequence of Principle 3.

> Principle 4 is configurable via CLI option `--remove-forward`.

Author: I'll change it to "allowed by default".

> Principle 4 is configurable via CLI option `--remove-forward`.

Author: New text: 

```
Firewalld follows some strict principles in regards to zones.

1. traffic ingresses one and only one zone
2. traffic egresses one and only one zone
3. a zone defines a level of trust
4. intra-zone (with-in the same zone) is allowed by default
5. inter-zone (zone to zone) is denied by default

Principle 4 and 5 are actually a consequence of Principle 3.

Principle 4 is configurable via zone option `--remove-forward`.
Principle 5 is configurable by adding new policies.
```

## End Station Firewall

> 

Author: Nope. Just trying to show use cases.

> 

Author: I re-titled these sections.
```
## Simple Use Case: End Station Firewall
```

```
## Complex Use Case: Network Firewall
```

When firewall rules are attached to zones, they filter traffic destined
to the host running firewalld. This is useful for end-stations that
provide services, e.g. a web server.

This example allows `https` for clients in the internal zone.

```
# firewall-cmd --zone internal --add-service https
```

For simple end station use cases, zones provide sufficient filtering
functionality. For more complex use cases, policies provide a generic
abstraction that applies to all traffic patterns.

## Network Firewall

Policies apply firewall rules in a stateful, unidirectional manner. This
means you only need to consider one direction of the traffic. The return

> traffic is implicitly allowed.

Author: I don't think so. The policy filters traffic in one direction. The return traffic is allowed due to statefulness.

> traffic is implicitly allowed.

Author: Does s/apply firewall rules/filter traffic/ make it clear?
i.e.
```
Policies filtering traffic in a stateful, unidirectional manner. This
means you only need to consider one direction of the traffic. The return
traffic is implicitly allowed.
```

> traffic is implicitly allowed.

Author: Reworded a bit. I hope it helps.
```
Policies apply firewall rules in a stateful, unidirectional manner. This
means you only need to consider one direction of the traffic. The
traffic's return path is implicitly allowed due to firewalld's stateful
filtering.
```

Policies are associated with an ingress zone and an egress zone. The
ingress zone is where the traffic originated (received). The egress zone
is where the traffic leaves (sent).

In this example, `myPolicy` will filter forwarded traffic originating
from the `internal` ingress zone and destined for the `external` egress
zone.

```
+----------+                 +----------+
|          |                 |          |
| internal |     myPolicy    | external |
|  (zone)  |  ------------>  |  (zone)  |
|          |                 |          |
+----------+                 +----------+
```

This is a common scenario for a home network. To allow the LAN
(internal) access the internet you can allow all traffic by setting the

> default target of the policy using `--set-target`.

Author: This example uses the `external` zone, which has masquerade enabled by default.

Should I add an example to explicitly enable masquerade?

```
# firewall-cmd --policy myPolicy --set-target ACCEPT
```

Alternatively, a strict network may allow only a subset of traffic. In
this example, only `http` and `https` are allowed; other traffic will be
rejected.

```
# firewall-cmd --policy myPolicy --add-service http
# firewall-cmd --policy myPolicy --add-service https
```

## Runtime and Permanent Configuration

Firewalld maintains separate runtime and permanent configurations. This
allows runtime only changes. Manipulating the permanent configuration

> requires using the `--permanent` CLI option.

Reviewer 2: Enhance this by: "Runtime configuration does not persist during program restarts (or machine reboots). At startup it is populated from persistent configuration." (In better English probably. ;)

Author: Reworded:

```
Firewalld maintains separate runtime and permanent configurations. This
allows runtime only changes. The runtime configuration does not persist
after firewalld reload or restart. At startup it is populated from the
permanent configuration. Manipulating the permanent configuration
requires using the `--permanent` option.
```

title: "Concepts"
--- 

## Introduction

firewalld aims to be a simple, zoning, stateful firewall. Firewall rules
are organized into zones and policies. Zones logically separate the
network. Policies apply rules to traffic flowing between zones.

This looks like the following:

```

> +----------+     policyA     +----------+

Reviewer: It appears that the concept is clearly outlined and is easily understood. How do you feel about adding styled graphs with the jekyll-mermaid plugin?
```mermaid
graph LR;
    A("internal<br>(zone)") -->|policyB| B("external<br>(zone)")
    B -->|policyA| A 
```

Author: Is the plugin enable by default?

Author: I found this blog post: https://github.blog/2022-02-14-include-diagrams-markdown-files-mermaid/

But it's unclear to me if it's enabled in github pages, or just repo markdown files.

Author: I'll use the mermaid, if it doesn't render we'll figure it out after the merge. ;)

Reviewer: > So it definitely took some playing around to get it to work. I ended up having to add some script tags to the `page` layout. I will probably tweak some settings.

It looks great, thanks!

Principle 4 and 5 are actually a consequence of Principle 3.

Principle 4 is configurable via CLI option `--remove-forward`.

## End Station Firewall

When firewall rules are attached to zones, they filter traffic destined
to the host running firewalld. This is useful for end-stations that
provide services, e.g. a web server.

This example allows `https` for clients in the internal zone.

```
# firewall-cmd --zone internal --add-service https
```

For simple end station use cases, zones provide sufficient filtering
functionality. For more complex use cases, policies provide a generic
abstraction that applies to all traffic patterns.

## Network Firewall

Policies apply firewall rules in a stateful, unidirectional manner. This
means you only need to consider one direction of the traffic. The return
traffic is implicitly allowed.

Policies are associated with an ingress zone and an egress zone. The
ingress zone is where the traffic originated (received). The egress zone
is where the traffic leaves (sent).

In this example, `myPolicy` will filter forwarded traffic originating
from the `internal` ingress zone and destined for the `external` egress
zone.

```

> +----------+                 +----------+

Reviewer: ```mermaid
graph LR;
    A("internal<br>(zone)") -->|myPolicy| B("external<br>(zone)")
```

title: "Concepts"
--- 

## Introduction

> Firewalld is a simple, stateful, zoned based firewall. Policies and

Reviewer 3: Maybe 'zone-based' instead of 'zoned based'.

Principle 4 is configurable via zone option `--remove-forward`.
Principle 5 is configurable by adding new policies.

## Firewall Rules

Policies apply firewall rules in a stateful, unidirectional manner. This
means you only need to consider one direction of the traffic. The
traffic's return path is implicitly allowed due to firewalld's stateful
filtering.

Policies are associated with an ingress zone and an egress zone. The
ingress zone is where the traffic originated (received). The egress zone
is where the traffic leaves (sent).

In this example, `myPolicy` will filter forwarded traffic originating
from the `internal` ingress zone and destined for the `external` egress
zone.

```mermaid
graph LR;
    A("internal<br>(zone)") -->|myPolicy| B("external<br>(zone)")
```

This is a common scenario for a home network. To allow the LAN
(internal) access the internet you can allow all traffic by setting the
default target of the policy using `--set-target`.

```
# firewall-cmd --policy myPolicy --set-target ACCEPT
```

Alternatively, a strict network may allow only a subset of traffic. In
this example, only `http` and `https` are allowed; other traffic will be
rejected.

```

> # firewall-cmd --policy myPolicy --add-service http

Reviewer 3: I think this is where users get lost... there is no indication in this command that any zones are being affected. Does this command 'work' because the firewalld default zone on the machine on the strict network is 'internal'?

Author: No. This command is affecting a policy, not a zone. Note the `--policy` option.

Reviewer 3: So then what causes `myPolicy` to be applied to any zones in particular? I seem to have missed that.

Author: In this example `myPolicy` affects traffic forwarded the `internal` zone to the `external` zone (explained in lines 51-53). It does not "apply to a zone" directly.

https://github.com/firewalld/firewalld.github.io/pull/25/commits/f68ad2461f121e561564a131dc05f0ff8a93d629#diff-296328860e666fb622185f2b4951481a189a5f689bbbea8cc2d7eabd0d50a057R51-R53

Reviewer 3: OK, that's helpful. I guess my remaining concern is learning how that configuration occurred... should I assume that some command *before* the one shown created `myPolicy` and connected it to those zones? If so, then I'm happy :-)

Author: Yes. I didn't show the creation of `myPolicy` because I was trying to show only the concepts. Would it help if I showed the CLI output for `myPolicy`? It's below.

```
[root@vm-bos-rhel8 ~]# firewall-cmd --info-policy myPolicy
myPolicy (active)
  priority: -1
  target: CONTINUE
  ingress-zones: internal
  egress-zones: external
  services: 
  ports: 
  protocols: 
  masquerade: no
  forward-ports: 
  source-ports: 
  icmp-blocks: 
  rich rules: 
```

And these are the commands that create `myPolicy`:
```
# firewall-cmd --permanent --new-policy myPolicy
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy myPolicy --add-ingress-zone internal
# firewall-cmd --permanent --policy myPolicy --add-egress-zone external
```

Reviewer 3: In my opinion that would help quite a lot :-)

Author: I pushed the update. Please take a look.
